---
id: 2029
title: Check if an iterated Prisoner's Dilemma strategy is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium
date: 2024-10-15T04:44:54+00:00
author: nadiah_kristensen
layout: post
guid: http://nadiah.org/blog/?p=2028
permalink: /2024/11/20/kleshnina_2023
image: /wp-content/uploads/2024/11/timeout_grim_wsls.png
categories:
  - cooperation
---

I recently read a paper by Kleshnina et al. (2023), 
[The effect of environmental information on evolution of cooperation in stochastic games](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-023-39625-9.pdf),
which provided an opportunity to teach myself about how to analyse iterated games.
In particular,
the problem they investigated admits 64 possible scenarios
with 256 possible strategies each,
and I was interested in writing code that could automate the analysis.
The solution I eventually landed on 
([Github repo](https://github.com/nadiahpk/kleshnina-2023-playground))
used a combination of 
[SymPy](https://www.sympy.org/en/index.html),
[NetworkX](https://networkx.org/),
[SageMath](https://www.sagemath.org/),
the [Z3 Theorem Prover](https://microsoft.github.io/z3guide/docs/logic/intro/),
and [PyEDA](https://pyeda.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for Boolean minimisation,
but I think my approach could be improved.

### Background to the paper

Kleshnina et al. (2023) 
studied an iterated Prisoner's Dilemma (PD) 
where the actions of the players affect the environment and visa versa.
Typically, if the environment is good,
the players receive higher payoffs,
but if some players defect,
then the environment transitions from good to bad.
They were interested in what effect knowledge of the environment's state 
would have on cooperation outcomes.
Here, however, I will focus on one small aspect of the methodology:
how to identify if a strategy is a sub-game perfect Nash equilibrium and the conditions required.
This is the focus of Supplementary Note 3.

#### Game structure

Two players are playing an iterated a Prisoner's Dilemma (PD),
where in each round they can either cooperate (C) or defect (D).
The environment has two possible states, $$S = \{ s_1, s_2 \}$$, 
or 'good' and 'bad', respectively.
The environment state determines payoffs according to the tables below,
where $$b_1 > b_2 > c$$.

In the good environment:

|   |     C     | D    |
|:-:|:---------:|:----:|
| C | $$b_1 - c$$ | $$-c$$ |
| D | $$b_1$$     | $$0$$  |
{: style="width: 200px; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;"}


In the bad environment:

|   |     C     | D    |
|:-:|:---------:|:----:|
| C | $$b_2 - c$$ | $$-c$$ |
| D | $$b_2$$     | $$0$$  |
{: style="width: 200px; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;"}

#### Environment transitions

I will focus on the scenario where the environment is deterministic
and changes state depending on its previous state and the players' actions. 
In each round, the environment will either transition to the good state or the bad state.
To represent this mathematically, 
let $$q_{a, \overline{a}}^i$$ be an indicator variable given the previous environment state $$i$$ 
and player actions $$a, \overline{a}$$. 
When $$q_{a, \overline{a}}^i = 1$$, the environment will transition to the good state in the next round; when $$q_{a, \overline{a}}^i = 0$$, it will transition to the bad state. 
The complete set of possible transitions can be represented by the vector:

$$
    \boldsymbol{q} = ( q_{CC}^1, q_{CD}^1, q_{DD}^1; q_{CC}^2, q_{CD}^2, q_{DD}^2 ).
$$

I will also focus on the full-information setting,
where players actions depend on both
the current environment state as well as the players' previous actions (memory-1).
Similar to the environment transitions, 
we use an indicator variable $$p_{a, \overline{a}}^j$$ to represent a player's decision in state $$j$$ given previous actions $$a, \overline{a}$$. 
Here, $$p_{a, \overline{a}}^j = 1$$ indicates cooperation 
and $$p_{a, \overline{a}}^j = 0$$ indicates defection. 
A player's complete strategy can therefore be represented by the vector:

$$\boldsymbol{p}_F = ( p_{CC}^1, p_{CD}^1, p_{DC}^1, p_{DD}^1; p_{CC}^2, p_{CD}^2, p_{DC}^2, p_{DD}^2 ).$$

#### Player strategies

In Supplementary Note 3, Kleshnina et al. study what they call the 'timeout' game. 
In this game, if any player defects, both are penalised by spending one round in the bad environment. 
This mechanism can be represented by the transition vector:

$$ \boldsymbol{q} = (1, 0, 0; 1, 1, 1). $$

They analyse several strategies in this setting, including one that combines two well-known approaches: playing 'Grim' in the good environment and 'win-stay, lose-shift (WSLS)' in the bad environment. This hybrid strategy is represented by the vector:

$$ \boldsymbol{p} = (1, 0, 0, 0; 1, 0, 0, 1)$$

#### One-shot deviation analysis

Kleshnina used the [one-shot deviation principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One-shot_deviation_principle)
to determine when the Grim-WSLS strategy in the timeout environment
is a sub-game perfect Nash equilibrium (SPNE).
Her analysis examines every possible combination of previous actions and current 
environment state (e.g., (CC, good), (CD, good), (DC, good), ..., (DC, bad), (DD, bad)). 
For each combination, we calculate:

- $$\pi_{a \overline{a}, i}$$: the payoff for following the strategy
- $$\hat{\pi}_{a \overline{a}, i}$$: the payoff for deviating from the strategy for one round
- $$\pi_{a \overline{a}, i} - \hat{\pi}_{a \overline{a}, i}$$: the net benefit of staying with the strategy

For the strategy to qualify as a SPNE, 
it must always be more profitable to stick with the strategy than to deviate from it 
for even a single round. Mathematically, this means:

$$
    \pi_{a \overline{a}, i} - \hat{\pi}_{a \overline{a}, i} \geq 0 \text{ for all } (a \overline{a}, i).
$$

As an example,
consider the payoffs of the non-deviating and deviating players starting at CC in the good environment.
For the non-deviating case,
if both players start at CC, then they will cooperate in all subsequent rounds.
The payoff will be

$$(b_1-c) + \delta(b_1-c) + \delta^2 (b_1-c) + \ldots, $$

where $$\delta$$ is the probability of playing another round.
Game theorists often use a $$(1- \delta)$$ normalisation to simplify the analysis. 
So the non-deviating payoff is calculated:

$$ 
\begin{align*}
    \pi_{\text{CC, good}} 
    &= (1 - \delta) \left( (b_1-c) + \delta(b_1-c) + \delta^2 (b_1-c) + \ldots \right),\\
    &= (b_1 - c) \underbrace{(1 - \delta) \left( 1 + \delta + \delta^2  + \ldots \right)}_{=1},  \\
    \pi_{\text{CC, good}} 
    &= b_1 - c.
\end{align*}
$$

To calculate the one-shot deviation payoff,
we calculate what the payoff would be if
the focal player plays the opposite of what their strategy says for just one round,
i.e., instead of C they play D,
and the next round and then revert to their strategy.

The payoff in each round is tabulated below

|               | 0              | 1              | 2              | 3              | 4              | 5              | ... |
|--------------:|:--------------:|:--------------:|:--------------:|:--------------:|:--------------:|:--------------:|:---:|
| state         | 1              | 1              | 2              | 1              | 2              | 1              | ... |
| player 1      | C              | **D**          | D              | D              | C              | C              | ... |
| player 2      | C              | C              | D              | D              | C              | C              | ... |
| state transn  | **1**00; 111   | 1**0**0; 111   | 10**0**; 111   | 100; 11**1**   | **1**00; 111   | **1**00; 111   | ... |
| strat. transn | **1**000; 1001 | 1000; 10**0**1 | 1000; 100**1** | **1**000; 1001 | **1**000; 1001 | **1**000; 1001 | ... |
| payoff        |                |$$b_1$$         | 0              | 0              |$$b_2 - c$$     |$$b_1 - c$$     | ... |

The actual payoff is

$$b_1 + \delta^3(b_2-c) + \delta^4( b_1 - c + \delta^1 (b_1 - c) + \ldots),$$

which normalises to

$$\hat{\pi}_{\text{CC, good}} = b_1(1-\delta) + \delta^3(b_2-c)(1-\delta) + \delta^4( b_1 - c ).$$

Therefore, from the (CC, good) starting point, we obtain a condition for the strategy to be a SPNE

$$
\pi_{\text{CC, good}} - \hat{\pi}_{\text{CC, good}} 
= b_1 \delta (1 - \delta^3) - b_2 \delta^3 (1 - \delta) - c(1 - \delta^3)
\geq 0.
\label{1} \tag{1}
$$

To simplify the condition, Kleshnina et al. take the limit as $$\delta \rightarrow 1$$,
which represents a kind of best-case scenario to identify a necessary condition.
First we pull out common $$1-\delta$$ terms

$$
\pi_{\text{CC, good}} - \hat{\pi}_{\text{CC, good}} 
= (1 - \delta) \{
    b_1 \delta (1 + \delta + \delta^2) 
    - b_2 \delta^3 
    - c (1 + \delta + \delta^2)
\},
$$

and as $$\delta \rightarrow 1$$, the condition becomes

$$ 
\lim_{\delta \rightarrow 1} (\pi_{\text{CC, good}} - \hat{\pi}_{\text{CC, good}})
= 3 b_1 - b_2 - 3 c \geq 0.
\label{2}
\tag{2}
$$

The analysis above is repeated for every possible combination (CC, good), (CD, good), ..., (DD, bad).
Kleshnina et al. find that the condition is satisfied for all other combinations
except (DD, bad),
which, in a similar way to (CC, good) above, results in a condition

$$
\lim_{\delta \rightarrow 1} (\pi_{\text{DD, good}} - \hat{\pi}_{\text{DD, good}})
= 2 b_1 - b_2 - 2 c \geq 0.
\label{3}
\tag{3}
$$

Both of the conditions must be satisfied in order for the strategy to be a SPNE.
However, we can simplify the analysis by determining
relationship between the two conditions.
Eq. 2 can be rewritten $$b_1 - c + 2 b_1 - b_2 - 2 c \geq 0$$.
Because $$b_1 > c$$,
we know that if Eq. 3 is satisfied, then Eq. 2 is satisfied.
Therefore,
Eq. 3 is the necessary condition for the strategy to be a SPNE.

### Automating the analysis

In the [kleshnina-2023-playground](https://github.com/nadiahpk/kleshnina-2023-playground)
Github repository, 
I provide code that automates analysis above for an arbitrary 
environment $$\boldsymbol{q}$$ and strategy $$\boldsymbol{p}$$.
Below,
I will highlight some points of interests,
and I also note areas that I'm uncertain about / could be improved.

#### Encoding the environment and strategy as a directed graph

I used NetworkX to encode every $$(\boldsymbol{q}, \boldsymbol{p})$$
as a directed graph.
The nodes are the environment-state + action pairs,
e.g., (CC, good),
and the edges are the transitions between them.
Fig. 1 below shows the Timeout-Grim-WSLS example from above.

{%
    include figure.html
    src="/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/timeout_grim_wsls.png"
    caption="Figure 1. State transitions for the Grim-WSLS strategy played in the Timeout environment. Generated using `dottify_state_space()` in `fncs_general.py`."
%}


#### Identifying attractors

In the Timeout-Grim-WSLS example above,
the state (CC, good) is a steady state -- 
once reached,
players continue to cooperate and the environment remains good.
However, 
it's also possible to have periodic states that cycle through multiple configurations. 

Consider an environment

$$
\boldsymbol{q} = (1, 1, 0; 0, 0, 1),
$$

and the strategy

$$
\boldsymbol{p} = (1, 0, 0, 0; 0, 0, 1, 1).
$$

As illustrated in Fig. 2 below,
this system has three attractors:
1. A steady state or period-1 cycle: (CC, good) $$\rightarrow$$ (CC, good) $$\rightarrow$$ ...
1. A period-2 cycle: (CD, bad) $$\rightarrow$$ (DC, bad) $$\rightarrow$$ (CD, bad) $$\rightarrow$$ ...
1. A period-3 cycle: (CC, bad) $$\rightarrow$$ (DD, bad) $$\rightarrow$$ (DD, good) $$\rightarrow$$ (CC, bad) $$\rightarrow$$ ...

We need to identify such cyles,
and we will find that the normalisation used above no longer applies.

{%
    include figure.html
    src="/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/cycle_example.png"
    caption="Figure 2. An example scenario with attractors that are period-1, period-2, and period-3 cycles."
%}


To identify cycles,
I used the `strongly_connected_components()` function from NetworkX.
A [strongly connected component (SCC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strongly_connected_component)
is a subgraph of a directed graph that has a path in each direction between each pair of vertices
and is maximal with respect to this property.
This function returns multi-node cycles
plus SCCs of length 1.
SCCs of length 1 may either be a node with no incoming links
or a period-1 cycle.
This is implemented in the `find_cycles()` function in `fncs_general.py`.

```python
def find_cycles(G):

    # find the attractors using the strongly-connected components algorithm
    sccs = list(nx.strongly_connected_components(G))
    cycles = []
    for scc in sccs:
        if len(scc) > 1:
            # multi-node SCCs are always cycles
            cycles.append(scc)
        elif len(scc) == 1:
            node = list(scc)[0]
            # an SCC of size 1 is a steady-state iff it's a self-loop
            if G.has_edge(node, node):
                cycles.append({node})

    return cycles
```

Returning to our example in Fig. 2,
we find that the normalisation factor $$(1 - \delta)$$ no longer applies.
For example,
the unnormalised no-deviation payoff from (CD, good) is

$$
\begin{align*}
    \pi_{\text{CD, good}} 
    &= \delta 0 + \delta^2(b_2 - c) + \delta^3 0 + \delta^4 0 + \ldots, \\
    &= \delta \left( \frac{\delta (b_2 - c)}{1- \delta^3} \right). \\
\end{align*}
$$

Therefore,
when the payoffs are calculated in `calc_longterm_payoffs()` 
(in `fncs_general.py`),
we leave them in their unnormalised form and perform the simplifications
later when the conditions are evaluated (in SageMath, detailed below).

#### Calculating the no-deviation and deviation payoffs

I encoded the payoffs using SymPy (`calc_one_shot_devns.py`),
and checked the conditions using SageMath 
(`define_variables_assumptions.sage` and `check_spne.sage`).
To replicate the analysis done in Supplementary Note 3,
I did the checking of the conditions incrementally,
proceeding to the next step if the previous result was ambiguous.
1. Check the SPNE condition directly: 
Can SageMath immediately discern the sign of 
$$\pi_{a \overline{a}, i} - \hat{\pi}_{a \overline{a}, i}$$?
2. Use SageMath function `numerator_denominator()` to cancel the normalisation
factors. Can SageMath discern the sign of each? 
    - Note that I'm uncertain about the robustness of this step because it performs the simplifications
    I need as kind of side-effect of creating the fractional form and splitting it.
3. Simplify by setting $$\delta = 1$$. Can SageMath discern the sign of
$$\lim_{\delta \rightarrow 1} \pi_{a \overline{a}, i} - \hat{\pi}_{a \overline{a}, i}$$?
4. Write the condition from Step 3 to a file.

I found that SageMath had difficulty working in the $$(b_1, b_2, c)$$ parameter space,
so I shifted to an $$(x, y, c)$$ parameter space defined as

$$
\begin{align*}
    x &= b_2 - c, \\
    y &= b_1 - b_2,
\end{align*}
$$

with the constraints $$x, y > 0$$.

I don't feel very confident about the SageMath implementation.
I made an attempt to rewrite it in Z3,
but I ran into difficulties because Z3 does not have an equivalent to SageMath's 
`numerator_denominator()` function.
Perhaps I can use some combination of SymPy and Z3 for this step.
This is an area for future improvement.

For each $$\boldsymbol{q}$$,
output was a CSV file (`one_shot_devns_q_[binary string].csv`):

| p | not_SPNE | gCC_satisfied? | gCC_how_determined? | gCC_required_non_negative | ... |
|-|-|-|-|-|-|
| _00000000 | False | True | directly | c | ... |
| _00000001 | True | True | directly | (b2 - c)*d^2/(d^2 - 1) + c - (b2 - c)*d/(d^2 - 1) | ... |
| ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... |

#### Calculate the necessary conditions

For each strategy that had the potential to be a SPNE in environment $$\boldsymbol{q}$$,
I used the Z3 Theorem Prover to determine which of the conditions
(arising from each (CC,good), (CD, good), etc.) were the necessary conditions.
In other words,
I am analysing the relationships between
the expressions arising from
the requirement $$\pi_{a \overline{a}, i} - \hat{\pi}_{a \overline{a}, i} \geq 0$$,
such as the condition $$3 b_1 - b_2 - 3 c \geq 0$$ in the Timeout-Grim-WSLS example.

For each strategy, the initial steps were:

First, identify all unique conditions using `are_equivalent()` in `fncs_z3_1.py`:

```python
def are_equivalent(condn_a, condn_b):
    """
    Returns True if condn_a and condn_b and equivalent.
    """

    s = Solver()
    s.add(condn_a != condn_b)
    result = s.check() == unsat

    return result
```

Second, check if the unique conditions are mutually satisfiable (in `calc_necess_condns.py`):

```python
# earlier in the code, specify assumptions on parameters
b1, b2, c, d = Reals("b1 b2 c d")
variables = [b1, b2, c, d]
assumptions = And(
    d > 0,
    d <= 1,
    c > 0,  # b1 ≥ b2 > c
    b2 > c,
    b1 > b2, # NOTE I changed this from Maria's b1 >= b2
)

# for each strategies unique conditions ...

# check conditions' mutual satisfiability
s = Solver()
s.add(assumptions)
for condn in condns:
    s.add(condn)
result = s.check()
```

If the conditions were mutually satisfiable,
I then identified the minimal set of conditions that were the necessary conditions for that strategy.
For each pair of conditions $$C_1$$ and $$C_2$$,
I used Z3's `qe` Tactic to determine if $$C_1 \implies C_2$$,
implemented in `check_implication()`:

```python
# in the script that calls the function, specify we're using 'qe' tactic
tactic = Tactic("qe")

# for each pair of conditions, call this function
def check_implication(condn_a, condn_b, assumptions, variables, tactic):
    """
    Returns True if condn_a implies condn_b under the given assumptions
    """

    formula = ForAll(variables, Implies(And(assumptions, condn_a), condn_b))
    result = tactic.apply(formula)

    return result.as_expr()
```

This allowed me to construction an implications matrix,
which has rows and columns corresponding to the conditions,
and an entry 1 indicates that $$C_i \implies C_j$$.
The minimal set is the set of all conditions that are not implied by another condition,
i.e., the independent roots of the implications tree.

The results were stored in CSV files `necess_condns_q_[binary string].csv`.
The Timeout environment example (`necess_condns_q_100111.csv`)
is shown below.

| p | simul_sat? | necessary_conditions | necessary_conditions_xy |
|-|-|-|-|
| _00000000 | True | | |
| _00001000 | True | | |
| _10000000 | True | | |
| _10000001 | True | 2*b1 - b2 - 2*c | -1*c + x + 2*y |
| _10000111 | True | b1 - b2 - c | y + -1*c |
| _10001000 | True | | |
| _10001001 | True | 2*b1 - b2 - 2*c | -1*c + x + 2*y |
| _10001111 | True | b1 - b2 - c | y + -1*c |
| _10010000 | True | b1 - 2*c | -1*c + x + y |
| _10010001 | True | b1 - 2*c | -1*c + x + y |
| _10010110 | True | b1 - b2 - c \| -b2 + 2*c | y + -1*c \| c + -1*x |
| _10010111 | True | b1 - b2 - c | y + -1*c |
| _10011000 | True | b1 - 2*c | -1*c + x + y |
| _10011001 | True | b1 - 2*c | -1*c + x + y |
| _10011110 | True | b1 - b2 - c \| -b2 + 2*c | y + -1*c \| c + -1*x |
| _10011111 | True | b1 - b2 - c | y + -1*c |
| _11110000 | True | b1 - 2*c | -1*c + x + y |
| _11111000 | True | b1 - 2*c | -1*c + x + y |


#### Grouping same-condition strategies

Often,
different strategies $$\boldsymbol{p}$$ have the same necessary conditions.
To further summarise the analysis,
I grouped all such $$\boldsymbol{p}$$ together using PyEDA's Boolean minimisation
on the set of $$\boldsymbol{p}$$ binary strings.

For example,
in the Timeout environment,
the $$\boldsymbol{p}$$ corresponding to the following 4 binary strings
have no additional conditions in order to be a SPNE:
```
00000000
00001000
10000000
10001000
```
These four strings can be represented in a more compact form by a single string
```
-000-000
```
where the `-` indicates that the strategy can either cooperate or defect
in that state.

The Boolean minimisation was implemented in `group_necess_condns.py`
and output was written to CSV files `necess_condns_grouped_q_[binary string].csv`.
The Timeout environment example (`necess_condns_grouped_q_100111.csv`)
is shown below.

| id | necessary_conditions | necessary_conditions_xy | compact_ps |
|-|-|-|-|
| 0 | | | _-000-000 |
| 1 | 2*b1 - b2 - 2*c | -1*c + x + 2*y | _1000-001 |
| 2 | b1 - b2 - c | y + -1*c | _100--111 |
| 3 | b1 - 2*c | -1*c + x + y | _1111-000 \| _1001-00- |
| 4 | b1 - b2 - c \| -b2 + 2*c | y + -1*c \| c + -1*x | _1001-110 |

I wrote scripts `plot_necess_condns.py`
and `plot_transn_graphs_pq.py` to visualise each
$$\boldsymbol{p}$$ group and its necessary conditions.
I found it more convenient to work in the $$(x, y)$$ parameter space
for the conditions.

{%
    include figure.html
    src="/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/timeout_wsls_analysis.png"
    caption="Figure 3. Summary analysis of Grim-WSLS and Grim-Risker strategy played in the Timeout environment. Panels show (a) the Timeout environment state transitions, (b) the state transitions that result from the combined Grim-WSLS and Grim-Risker strategies played in the Timeout environment, and (c) the region of parameter space (purple) that satisfies the necessary condition for the strategies to be a SPNE."
%}

### A summary of all SPNE in sensible environments

With code to automate the analysis,
it is possible to do a sweep of a range of scenarios quickly.
Below, I show the results I obtained for
all environments with a 'sensible' transition pattern,
i.e., that stay in or return to the good environment when both players cooperate
and stay or return to the good environment when both players defect.
These environments match the pattern 

$$
\boldsymbol{q} = (1, -, 0; 1, -, 0).
$$

Figs. 4--6 below summarise the SPNE I found in each environmental scenario.

Environments are categorised based on how fragile they are
and their return conditions.
A fragile environment transitions from good to bad when any player defects,
but a resilient environment only transitions when both players defect.

{%
    include figure.html
    src="/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/harsh.png"
    caption="Figure 4. SPNE in harsh conditional return environments.
    From left to right, top to bottom, 
    the $$\boldsymbol{p}$$-groups in the fragile environment are
    `-----000`, `1----001`, and `1----111`;
    and in the resilient environment are
    `-00--000`, `100--001`, and `100--111`"
%}

The conditions for return from the bad to good environment
can be classified as:
1. harsh conditional -- both players must cooperate,
2. conditional -- at least one player must cooperate, or 
3. timeout -- returns regardless of what players do.

In all environments,
a variation that always defects in the bad environment in response to any
defection in the previous round is an unconditional SPNE.

{%
    include figure.html
    src="/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/conditional.png"
    caption="Figure 5. SPNE in conditional return environments.
    From left to right, top to bottom, 
    the $$\boldsymbol{p}$$-groups in the fragile environment are
    `-00--000`, `100--001`, and `100--111`;
    and in the resilient environment are
    `-00----0` and `100----1`"
%}

All other potential SPNE are conditional
and have (CC, good) as an attractor.
In the resilient environment,
they have in common a `100...` pattern,
which means that, if they are in the good environment,
they respond to defection by the other in the previous round 
with a defection.

{%
    include figure.html
    src="/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/timeout.png"
    caption="Figure 6. SPNE in timeout environments.
    From left to right, top to bottom, 
    the $$\boldsymbol{p}$$-groups in the fragile environment are
    `-000-000`, `1000-001`, `100--111`, `1111-000` or `1001-00-`,
    and `1001-110`;
    and in the resilient environment are
    `-000---0`, `100----1`, and `1001---0`."
%}

A strategy that defects in the bad environment
when the previous action was DD is only ever a potential SPNE in the timeout environment.
The strategy with the weakest necessary condition is such a strategy,
and it occurs in the resilient environment.

In the Github repository,
I also have results for $$\boldsymbol{q} = (1, -, 0; 1, 0, 1)$$.
I call this a 'strange return' because the bad environment improves
when both players defect.
Perhaps unsurprisingly,
some of the strategies and conditions it finds are quite different
from those above,
and we can visualise those results similar to the 'sensible' environment above
and puzzle over what they mean.

### References

Kleshnina, M., Hilbe, C., Šimsa, Š., Chatterjee, K. and Nowak, M.A., 2023. The effect of environmental information on evolution of cooperation in stochastic games. Nature Communications, 14(1), p.4153.